Welcome, warm greetings, friends. Warm greetings. So we begin by connecting to and reactivating,
re-recognizing our motivation of bodhichitta, the love and compassion we have for ourselves
and all sentient beings, to really kind of firmly let that kind of blossom in our own
mind right now, open our heart, open our mind, and connect to this stainless lineage wisdom
of the Buddha's teachings. And be so thankful for that and really see that precious opportunity
that we have together for this brief little time to reflect on the teachings of the Buddha
for the benefit of all beings.
Thank you. So the topic today that we have just a little window of time to share together
is talking about how Ngondro practice, our foundational practices, relate to the bardos.
So basically how we're using this Ngondro practice as somewhat of a rehearsal for going
through the bardos. And so that's kind of the topic and it's such a big extraordinarily
important topic. So we're just having a tiny little glimpse into a very extensive set of
teachings taught by the Buddha and Gurumbhache that have been maintained up until this present
moment. And so this is just like a little hint of these bardo teachings which are so
profound and powerful and that so many masters have given extensive commentaries on what
comes down to how to use this moment well. How we can really use this opportunity well,
this life well to make every moment meaningful and to really kind of define a charter course
into our future that's going to just be going from light to light, brighter and brighter.
And so this topic, I mean the first thing to really consider is really just a true fact
that we're all going to die. And so many of the teachings of the Buddha are kind of trying
to reorient our kind of like our tight kind of a little bit like scared way that we're
constantly engaging with experience. Always trying to avoid the things that don't feel
so comfortable and trying to get and hold onto the things that support us and make us
happy and the pleasurable things. So the teaching and just kind of that true insight, it's not
a Buddhist insight but just we're born so we're going to die. It's just a fundamental
truth of life and for the ego to hear that, my go at grasping and fixation, you know I
might intellectually kind of say oh I got that, you know resonate, oh of course I'm
going to die. But to really keep coming back to that thought, that contemplation and as
a practice like this time is limited. There's no certainty over this next moment. There
just really is no certainty. I know that sometime I will die and that I don't know when. And
so the ego in one sense the Buddha taught in his mind only school teachings that all
sentient beings share this same conviction that I am here, me. And I'm this basically
I'm the center of the universe. And I'm the same me that I was a minute ago and yesterday
and the year before. And this me just continues ongoing. That if we're a sentient being with
a sentient mind then we have this belief. Whether we consciously know it or we would
say we do, the Buddha taught that all of us have that. There's a me that's more special
than anything else that was, that's continuing through time uninterruptedly that we have
this core belief. So when this me hears something like I'm going to die, it does anything it
can to avoid it because it's fundamentally like I really don't believe that. So I'll
even act like oh I kind of understand that and not really let it hit my egoic fixation.
Not really let it kind of like put my decisions into question and to savor the moments of
experience. We have that expression killing time. I mean so much of my time spent distracted.
It's kind of wasting opportunities, just precious moments to reconnect with bodhicitta and goodness
of other beings. That's what a sentient being is called wandering. Kind of wandering after
this, wandering after that, drowa to wonder, wanderers. We kind of wonder from one distraction
to the next. So kind the Buddha gave us these little shocks to our egoic fixation like everything
born is going to die. This is the second mind turning. And he said again and again we're
trying to reintroduce this into our own mind stream to let our ego instead of pushing against
it so strongly just to consider it a little more deeply each time. So we always begin our
nundra practice with these four mind turnings. Preciousness of this opportunity, its fleeting
impermanent nature. That everything we do is always a part of this vast network of cause
and effect of interdependence. And that really having our tight fixation, our grasping onto
this me really causes a lot of dissatisfaction, discomfort, dis-ease, stress. Feels like I'm
always banging up against the world and not getting what I want. The suffering, the samsara.
And so I wonder and more or less kind of bang around against experience. And these four
mind turnings are just always a part of every nundra. And like Rinpoche's, the Venerable
Kempo Rinpoche says it should be the foundation of every single practice we do. Buddhist
terminology
is called renunciation. And Venerable Kempo sendone Rinpoche often really emphasizes it
on the more positive encouraging side as joy and appreciation. And that's what contemplating
this fact, this true fact. This life is limited. I don't know when my life will end. And none
of us do. And so I really have to use this opportunity and really savor the moments.
Maybe this is the last time we'll communicate. Maybe that was the last sunrise that I saw
this morning. It could be the last thing that, you know, last thing you hear. The last time
you get to see someone and actually the final words. We never know when our final words
are. So if we really take this to heart, it actually causes us to really like fully engage
in life, to savor life instead of being some kind of dreary news. It's like this buoyant
fueled urgency to like really use the moments well and let bodhicitta shine. And so this
comes to the fundamental amazing insight that the Buddha taught and that just about how
the nature is that when it comes to the moment of dying for every single sentient being that
at the moment of death, our true nature will be 100% completely revealed. There's nothing
we can do to stop that from happening. Every single sentient being from every person, a
little worm, gods in the gods realm, hell beings in the hell realms, the whole spectrum
of sentient beings at the moment of the when that sentient mind leaves its body, its embodiment,
the moment of death, its true nature is completely revealed. And so in Buddhism, that's really
the amazing thing that we're practicing for. And all these Bardo teachings in Tibetan Buddhism
taught by the Buddha, taught by Guru Padmasambhava really kind of have this key point at the
center of them, that this moment is coming when we're going to die. And at that moment,
there will be nothing getting in the way of our true nature fully shining. Our bodhicitta
will be bright as the autumn sky, unobstructed, limitless, open. And for that little window,
it's there and there's nothing obscuring it. And so that's what really, that's why so many
these great Mahayana practitioners and Tibetan Buddhist practitioners, they're like looking
forward to that opportunity. And one way, that's what we keep practicing in this nundra teaching.
Every moment, we're trying to recognize that true nature. In the beginning, we try to recognize
that nature. And then our practice arises as a refuge tree, and as ourselves supplicating
it. And all these enlightened activities happen, we do the seven branch offerings, and we receive
blessings, and then we mingle all the enlightened blessings of the wisdom beings, the actual
Buddhas with our mind. And then again, we rest in open awareness, this nature of mind. That's
what we keep practicing, even from one section to another, from the refuge section to the
bodhicitta section to the mandala section. Our nature is there, it arises as a pure display,
it dissolves and is the true nature. And then it arises as a pure display, then it dissolves
as a true nature. It's always the true nature and its expression, the empty essence and
its compassionate unobstructed display. So this is the same sequence of the bardos. We're
practicing this every time we do sadhana practice. We're really trying to consciously do this
with wisdom mind, so that when that time comes and our body actually stops working, it's
outside of our control, then this will be like, Oh, we're kind of, Oh, we've done this, we've
trained for this. We've been trying to merge all of our life activities with this wisdom
awareness. And we have these formal practice sessions where we're trying to recognize our
wisdom awareness, then mingle it with the blessings, the wisdom awareness of all the
enlightened masters, all embodied together as Guru Rinpoche and the refuge tree, and
then mingle that inseparably and relax. That's what we practice every time in our sadhana
practice. We're really rehearsing for this moment. And now the time of this life, everything's
in our favor. We can consciously make our body sit down or stand up. We can turn on
our bodhicitta or recognize our bodhicitta, expand our bodhicitta. There's so many things
we have that are supports to this recognition for our bodhicitta to really shine brightly.
And so that's really like, I know that fundamental urgency to use the time well. And it's why
nundra accumulation takes so long. We're trying to really get familiar, this meditation gom,
we're trying to really get familiar with what it's like to have, what is my nature like?
What's it like to hear sounds through the nature? What's it like to see things while
abiding in the nature? That's a Vajrayana practice. From pure mind arises pure speech
or energy arises pure forms. And that's kind of like a sadhana practice. And this great
lineage of masters have given us all these techniques. The visualization practice is
pure body and pure speech. It's called deity and mantra. And the completion stage practice
or dissolution stage practice is pure mind or wisdom awareness. So we have pure body,
pure speech, pure mind. That's like really directly pointing to what we're trying to
begin every session with. Fundamental motivation of pure perception. So we're really training
for how to use all of these experiences we go through. These mundane daily activities,
washing dishes and going to work and loving people, caring for kids, paying bills, dealing
with suffering, getting sick, being there for someone else who's sick. We're trying
to always mingle this with our wisdom mind and its wisdom expressions, its wisdom display.
So that's what Vajrayana practitioners are doing. So then when the moment when we lose
all control of our physical body, which we don't know when that moment is, then it'll
just, we'll be so familiar with the process. We could just let go and be at ease. That's
really what we're practicing for. And then when that true nature of mind is revealed
at that moment of death, when the body separates with the mind, we'll see it so clearly. They
call it like a child jumping into its mother's lap. And that will be such a significant event.
Say it's a type, it's a Dharmakaya enlightenment at that moment. And then the really like grounded
like really deep humble truth of that. If all that's true, then the humble assessment
of that is that I have never done that. Because I would be so much more realized than I am
now. Because I don't have any realization. But all countless lifetimes that that window
opened and my true nature was revealed. When I died, how many lives does the Buddha say
we've all taken? And I haven't done it because I can read my own mind now. So in that way
is a very humbling. But it's also really encouraging because I am alive right now. And you're alive
right now. We have all these practices we can do. We have this nundro. We can get really
good and maybe hopefully more familiar with our own true nature, our own absolute and
relative bodhicitta more than we ever have been before. And so this time when I die, because
it's coming, then I can just recognize what I've been practicing this whole time. What
all these empowerments, all these teachers are so kindly trying to point out to us again
and again. Look at that. See what is deathless. Recognize what's unchanging. Amidst all the
changing appearances. Look, discover for ourselves what's unchanging. What is deathless? And
Yamaka calls this the middle way view. The great prajnaparmita, the great mahamudra, zogchen,
great perfection, great completion. They're all pointing to this same thing. And so all
these Bardo teachings, what does Bardo mean? It means the intermediate point between two
usually illusory boundaries, two kind of bookends that we're holding. It's the in between Bardo.
A lot of, you know, sometimes this is talked about as like a liminal, the space in between.
So for sentient beings, there's birth and then death and then in between birth and death,
it's called a Bardo. We're in between these two points, even if they're not truly there.
It's difficult to find an actual fixed boundary like the moment of birth. It's like trying
to really pinpoint where does day turn into night? Where does night turn into day? If
we really try to look closely at that, we'll discover it is just arbitrary point and arbitrary
boundary we set up. But we believe day becomes night and night becomes day. It really seems
like that without looking so closely. But then there's all these transcendental logic,
the logic that's pointing to the true nature, the deathless nature, the absolute nature,
the wisdom mind we all have. We're using these techniques, this logic or these secondary
supports, all these conditions like doing a sadhana practice and taking a posture and
visualizing a certain form and reciting a certain mantra, all these secondary supports
to reconnect with that wisdom that's unchanging, that's always been there, that's stainless,
that's a true nature of all beings. So in a Bardo, there's like a lot of ways to talk
about it, but what this intermediate state, there's like three big phases in a human life,
a sentient life, we'll talk about human beings. There's the time from when we're born and
then we're living. That's one. And then at that point of living, at some point we'll
have a scenario happen where we get some sickness or something will happen and it'll start our
process of dying. And so from that process of when our dying begins to the moment of
death, that's the second phase, second Bardo. And then the third is after we die, the moment
of death, then there's what's called after death or that Bardo that happens after our
mind and our body separate. Then after that state, then we're born again. And then we
go through a life and it declines and then it dies and then there's a gap of after death
and then it gets a new body and it's born. And we repeat this three phase Bardo cycle.
Birth into life, dying into death, and then after death before we're born again. And all,
then the universe follows the cycle. It arises, expands, stays for a while, contracts, dissolves,
becomes empty space until it arises again, expands, contracts, dissolves, empty space.
And all of the cycle processes happen like this, the Buddha taught. So these are three
Bardo's. Then within life, there's two more Bardo's. Bardo of a dream, entering a dream
state and then having it dissolve and waking up. Bardo of the dream, that's between waking
and then we dream and then we wake up again. Or the Bardo of meditation, where we're in
our normal dualistic mind, then we enter a wisdom awareness, then that lasts for a certain
period, then we kind of, our ego comes in and our dualistic grasping holds on again and
then the meditation Bardo's over. So those are life and living and it includes meditation
Bardo and dream Bardo. And then this dying into the moment of death where the mind and
body separate. Right at that moment they say the true nature is revealed and that's called
the true nature Bardo. Where unobstructedly our nature is there, there's no habitual patterns
active to cover it up. And so it fully arises unobstructedly. That's called the true nature
Bardo. And then if that's too much and we don't see our nature then, it displays in
various ways. And if that is like we're not familiar with that, we're not comfortable,
we're not at ease, we're not allowing that experience to happen and merging with it,
then the sip of Bardo. The Bardo of becoming happens where our mind tightens up, habits
start coming back online. We start wondering to have some sense of grounded certainty.
We want a body and so we can look for this body. This is called this Bardo of becoming
until we actually, our mind gets a body and then birth happens again and then it's happy
and birthday once again. So these six Bardo's, Bardo of life, dreaming, meditation, dying
right at the moment of death, true nature. We miss that, Bardo of becoming and then we
go and born again. So it's these six phases, six Bardo's. And then very simply it just
says two. From the time where we don't recognize our nature until the moment when we do recognize
our nature, that's considered the length of a Bardo. So they say it's a point between
a recognition of nature or not recognition. So the Bardo is between ignorance and wisdom.
If we're in wisdom, that's called Rigpa in Tibetan Buddhism, then we're not in Ma Rigpa
or ignorance, not wise. So the Bardo span is the span of ignorance until we recognize
its nature and we're totally free and not in a Bardo. And then we're in this true nature
and then however long that lasts and we miss our recognition, ignorance starts again and
then the Bardo begins again. So they say fundamentally the only sentient beings have Bardo
experiences
because they're the only ones with ignorance. Wisdom beings don't experience Bardo because
they're not in ignorance, they're in wisdom. So they can see the sentient beings' nightmares
but they don't believe in them. They're not banging around, they're not wandering between
nightmares. They're just seeing all the causation of how minds kind of bang around against their
projections. So the point that all these Bardo teachings come back to again and again and
again, and this is such a vast, if you're interested in this, this is really opening
like a curiosity or a thread of inquiry. So many of these Bardo teachings again and again,
they really come to everything we experience as our mind. It's like that now when we're
awake. It's like that when we're dreaming. It's just an expression of our mind and we
see that after we wake up. Meditation, it's all just our mind. When we die, it's still
just our mind. When our body separates from our mind, all we have is our mind. It's habitual
residual self-sense, just like in a dream. It still feels like a body. It still feels
like it's in a place. It's searching, wondering for things based on its own habits. So that's
something, a thread we're trying to continue in all of this nundra practice. This is just
my mind. That's why I can arise so flexibly. That's why the mandala can arise and then
it can dissolve. Then it can re-arise and then dissolve again. It's going through this
same sequence but we're trying to integrate our wisdom, our attention, our wisdom awareness
with these same cycles, these same Bardo cycles. So we're trying to have our habits be refined
and so how all the wisdom is there and then the habits arise and they kind of release
and then they become the pure expression of that wisdom. That's what these sadhana practices
like nundra are trying to do. It's like Vajrayana, pure perception. It's fundamentally what we're
trying to do is use all these experiences of life and dying and death. And so time is
really short. It's of the essence. We only have a little window where this body is, all
the function is holding itself together and at a certain point that the energy, some of
the elements, they start losing position and then our body starts shutting down. So this
is like we're talking about this just intellectually like studying but we're trying to like survey
an upcoming event that's going to happen to us. Like seeing the obstacle course before
we're in it, like being a climber and you see the route you're going to take before
you're on the route. So that way when we're in it then we already have some familiarity.
We can be a little more flexible if surprise happens. We're already trying to get familiar
with what's the nature, this mind, everything's mind. What's the nature of this mind? We're
trying to get really familiar with that. So when an expression of mind happens we don't
shut down and our egoic fixation doesn't just shut everything off. And we just close our
eyes and little ignorance cocoon. But we can just open and become more courageous like
this great bodhisattvas. They'd really say this, the great bodhisattvas fear birth so
much more than death. Because birth we can't control. We're born little babies, human babies
for a solid year, two years. We can't do anything. Can't even hardly lift our head up most of
the time. Can't walk on our own, can't eat, can't clean ourselves. We're completely vulnerable.
And if we don't get some realization we'll have no control over that birth scenario.
But we can control now what our mind does during the process of death. These great Mahayana
and Tantrayana practitioners are really putting all this energy so that when that death happens
they can really seize that opportunity and let all these expressions happen as they are
and recognize this is just my mind displaying and they connect with the deathless nature
and they allow all the expressions to happen. And we've seen this with how these great masters
have passed. Such enthusiasm, such happiness, like birds flying away. And that possibilities
right in our hand right now. Because we have this precious human body and we have this
very short window to use it. And it's definitely going to happen that the body will dissolve
and die. But our mind will continue. This deathless nature is ongoing, it's continuous.
So these great bodhisattvas are trying to see how can I use this upcoming experience of
death to get even more realization so I can benefit even more beings. And then we're just
following in their footsteps. For the first time we're really trying to actually get some
deep realization so when this time comes it can be a complete celebration. It can recognize
this freedom nature that we have, that we've always had. It can really see it and then
at the moment of death when there's nothing blocking it we can just lean, just open and
just totally savor that and just reconnect with what we've been practicing all this time
in our lives in this nundra practice and these different creation, completion, sadhana practices.
It'll just be one of the delightful moments of our entire experience. We can really, that'd
be the moment of liberation or enlightenment. That's really what we're practicing for to
use that time. Why? Not to end the dream, not to stop experience. The dream can't be
ended. There is always a next. We can never be outside of interdependence. It's impossible.
The nature always expresses form as emptiness. Emptiness is form. It all, essence, the nature
always has an expressive capacity. The mind always arises as knowing. They call it luminosity.
Always has this moving energy so there's no way to stop the dream but we can use the dream
for the benefit of ourselves and all beings. Make this such a wonderful, exceptional, extraordinary
dream for everyone we come in contact with and also that means to repay the kindness of
all these beings who've been our parents before and have shown us so much kindness in small
little ways, in big, big ways for so much time. Then we can really develop some capacity
to really help them, like really to like actually love them unconditionally, like the four bound
less,
you know. And then everyone's been our parent. We can have that view with all these beings.
This bodhicitta is so deep, boundless love, boundless compassion, boundless sympathetic
joy, boundless equanimity, can really impartially kind of repay these debts we have, ways we've
hurt others before. Make amends now. We can just totally buoy and uplift our experiences
and these relationships we've had so long ago and really use this opportunity. So there's
so many different teachings on this. Rinpoche, Kemposerong Rinpoche just gave these Amitabha
teachings and Dubutta was so kind, gave all these techniques that even if we're not familiar
with our mind, I mean being familiar with our mind means you never lose the recognition.
That's what these great masters, they're so careful about karma. So even if they're always
stable and abiding in their nature, like if there's any little interruption, then they're
really trying to have that not be there. Completely, they're going for completely uninterrupted
awareness of their nature. So there's never a gap. There's never a Bardo experience. So
then they don't, in that Bardo experience, then it's just a duality mind and whatever
habit it comes up, they just, we grab it. We have no control over that. So this same process
really is mimicked in every time we do this sadhana practices, this nundra. From this
open first thing, we always try to recognize our awareness. Then that awareness arises
naturally as unconditioned compassion, all arising samadhi, limitless compassion, not
because of an object, but it's just that's its nature. It's just completely unrestricted
compassion. And then that empty flexible nature and that totally boundless compassion come
together in a more form or apparent display is the union of emptiness and compassion,
the seed syllable samadhi. Like that's the beginning of every single visualization practice
we do. And they say that that emptiness is like that emptiness awareness, the first one,
the true nature, samadhi, that purifies dying and death, the Bardo of dying and death. And
that all arising compassion that just naturally comes out, purifies the after death Bardo.
And then when that distills or crystallized into a more apparent form and as a deity with
the retinue and does all these enlightened activities, that purifies the Bardo of birth
and living. So every sadhana practice, we're purifying these three big Bartos of dying
and death after death, and then birth and living. Like every single sadhana practice,
that's what we're doing. We're purifying our normal, mundane, restricted egoic, and just
kind of like the normal casual ways we experience every day. These sadhana practices were
completely
transforming them to have them permeated by this wisdom, the deathless nature, our unchanging
awareness. So this is right at the beginning of every sadhana practice. It's definitely
the beginning of non-bro. And then as the, you know, in the refuge tree with Guru Rinpoche
and all the retinues, then that they do a light and activities of emanating and gathering.
And we received the blessings and we mingle and merge with their blessing, their wisdom
mind and that dissolution happens back into the true nature. So we're really just mimicking
this same natural practice of rising emptiness, of rising as infinite compassion, distilling
as all these compassionate activities, which then dissolve into just bodhicitta and its
absolute nature. And we're just constantly going again and again in this cycle, trying
to purify our normal egoic sense of what this cycle of life of being born, living, dying,
so that when that process happens and our mind and body separate, then we'll already,
we'll have reoriented with this and we'll be coming more from a place of wisdom with
our true nature instead of from duality mind, which is just wondered forever, kind of banging
against its own projections.
So this key point and just, it's great. I'm just to repeat it again. The answer is always
bodhicitta. The best way to use this moment is bodhicitta. Bodhicitta has relative and
absolute aspects. The absolute aspect is the deathless nature, absolute truth, absolute
bodhicitta, unchanging nature. The relative aspect is all of its natural, rising, compassionate
displays, boundless, the four boundless qualities and the activities of the six paramitas. It's
all bodhicitta. We can do this really simply. At the moment of dying, activate bodhicitta.
That's the full package. Practice bodhicitta. If we ever wonder what practice should I do?
Bodhicitta. Forever in our practice and we're wondering, is my practice good? Then if there's
a bodhicitta, it's good. And if there's not, then we need to turn on bodhicitta. When dying
process happens, and I don't know, this is all just theory for me, but when everything
starts shutting down and I have no control, it needs to be really simple. My, what I go
to, needs to be really simple. For some great masters, they say, "Omani Pemehung." Purifies
all the three doors, the six doors, the six ways we could take rebirth, "Omani Pemehung."
So easy to remember, we can say it, "Omani Pemehung." Just for a moment in the after
death phase, if we disconnect once to our devotion to our teacher, our connection to
the three jewels, we let bodhicitta shine on once. Then the impact of that moment, when
it's just our mind and its projections and there's no body holding it at all, the impact
of that significant virtue, like the connecting to our own wisdom, is so powerful there that
we can get great realization. So right now we need to really get in that habit of when
something challenge comes up, open, and have this, whatever this connection we have according
to our instructions of our teacher, that we need to really get habitual with, "Oh, what's
the easy thing? What's my simple answer? Is it Omani Pemehung? Is it to pray to Gurumache?
Is it to pray to Amitabha? Is it to activate bodhicitta?" Because at the moment of death,
and it's open, and if we don't recognize that, this cuny-bardo, the true nature, then that
natural quality of just pervasive energy starts just arising. They say it's like sounds like
thousands of thunderclaps. It's just a natural expression of the true nature, which then
takes more form like lights, which takes more form like all this kind of beams, which then
takes more form of deities, and then different kinds of deities. That's all within this,
it's just a natural expression, they say, of the true nature, and that little window
can be really quick after the moment of death, or it can take a long time, but it's usually
a little short. But that's all we're practicing in this sadhana practice of nundra. It's the
same thing. We're just training in it, using our duality habits to connect to the openness
and let it arise as a natural display and be totally at ease and relaxed and with bodhicitta
and compassion for all beings and then let it dissolve again. We're just practicing for
that gap, the bardo of the true nature, and it just so happens that it makes our lives
happy too, and it makes our relationships better, and it makes our future so bright.
But we're really preparing to like, when those natural displays of mind happen, and high
teachings, togal teachings, this is the same thing. High teaching, trekto teaching, this
is the same thing. We're just pointing out that moment of death, that's what we're practicing
to recognize. Those are the highest teachings Buddha taught, Trekto and Togoss, all for that
moment, and these three samadhis are the same. I mean, it's what we're practicing in this
sadhana, which it's extraordinary that we've come across such amazing, extraordinary teachings
that have been held so courageously, so carefully, for so long, for thousands of years, and we
can somehow have them. We can just open this sadhana book and start, which we'll do here
just in a couple minutes. It's like, how amazing fortune, you know. But at that time when it's,
that's why, why is Tibetan Buddhism so vivid? To say that, to let the true nature just shine
unobstructed, it's so brilliant, it's so bright, and so we're training also to like, let the
energy, the natural expression of our own nature, just let it pour out. Don't shy away from
like, kind of the brilliant display. Just like, be open and let the variety of experience
happen. So that's also why in our sadhana practices, we're letting all these forms shape and take
different shapes and go through different activities according to what the sadhana says.
To just get flexible, oh, it can be this way, it can be that way, it takes this shape, takes
this form, and we're letting our mind be open enough that it just lets these experiences
happen and doesn't shut down or push away or play favorites. It just lets any of it happen.
And so this sadhana practice, we're really training our mind to let its own nature radiate
as it just will in response to like, what's actually helpful for beings. So it's such
a rich topic. And the point is really, you know, these sadhana practices are so deep.
This nundra practice is so deep. If we can make this like a very easy thing to come to
our mind, the four thoughts that turn the mind, refuge in bodhicitta, making mandala
offerings, purifying our habits, accumulating the wisdom, mingling our minds with the blessings
of the lineage masters, the enlightened beings near and far and everywhere, then this really
we're making such a meaningful use of our life and that it's going to only help us during
all the challenges we face now and long into the future. And then there is this special
opportunity when we die that if we don't get full realization before then, then this moment
will come where the true nature will inevitably arise and dawn. And then if we can recognize
it then and recognize everything as its display, this is just our display of the changeless
nature, our own mind. So I hope just my constantly, repeatingly saying the same thing is helpful.
This is just our own wisdom mind displaying. And that's what all these sadhana practices
we're trying to just get make friends with it where we enjoy it. And then we get into
post meditation and we can just savor it, savor the time with friends and family. And
just be, just have a such a gentle at ease approach which we've seen in all these masters.
So at ease and yet still so practical and so grounded and so with such overflowing gratitude
for the lineage that's maintained this and such humility for all these masters who've
accomplished these practices that are stably abiding in this realization all the time for
so long now, lifetimes after lifetimes and they keep coming back and helping us. Such
wow to be a part of such an amazing extraordinary thing to be practicing something, a term I
revealed by as long as Nudjir Rinpoche, to receive pith instructions from our own personal
teachers, your personal teachers. It's like such a fabulous, really kind of like can't
even explain or conceive of a more precious opportunity. And we have it now. So I'm so
thankful to be doing this with you and these are really just reminders for me to not waste
my time and really take this to heart, the opportunity that this life can actually end
with total liberation, complete enlightenment. If it really sees this opportunity it's totally
possible and even if I've never done it before because I haven't, then I can this time. If
I just put in the time and keep relaxing, keep following in the footsteps of the Buddha,
that that's a very real possibility for anyone who really does that. So, thank you.